‎Well, perhaps we could take our Bibles
‎and turn to Colossians 3:​13.
‎And let’s analyze this verse together
‎and see what it is that Jehovah expects of us.
‎So in Colossians 3:​13,
‎it says:
“Continue putting up with one another
‎“and forgiving one another freely
‎“even if anyone has a cause
for complaint against another.
‎“Just as Jehovah freely forgave you,
‎you must also do the same.”
‎Well, certainly this verse
‎gives us plenty of food for thought
​—doesn’t it?​—
‎areas in which, perhaps,
we can work on and improve in.
‎But what two things stand out
‎as being required of us?
‎Well, looking back,
you notice the first one,
‎“continue putting up with one another,”
‎and then the second point,
‎“forgiving one another freely.”
‎Well, let’s look at that first expression:
‎“Continue putting up with one another.”
‎Well, what’s the difference
between these two expressions?
‎Well, we’re told that this first expression
‎doesn’t refer to serious sins
but perhaps talks about things
‎that are irritating, annoying,
‎things that we may not necessarily
‎have a cause for complaint concerning,
‎but they still get us very upset anyway
‎​—these minor things.
‎What are some of the things that annoy you?
‎Let’s be honest.
‎Are you annoyed when someone is always late?
‎Are you annoyed when they’re always early?
‎Are you annoyed when someone is outspoken?
‎Does it annoy you when someone is too quiet?
‎It’s amazing​
—isn’t it?​—
‎what the things that annoy us are.
‎I remember back in the ’70’s,
Brother Knorr gave an outstanding talk
‎where he alluded to the fact
that maybe there’s a sister in the congregation,
‎and she’s hearing
this other sister, new in the truth,
‎answering up time after time,
‎and in her heart, she’s thinking,
‎‘Why doesn’t she just keep quiet?’
‎Well, maybe we’ve all
experienced those feelings.
‎And if we’re judged on them,
perhaps we’ll agree:
‎‘Well, it’s not justified;
I don’t really have a cause,
‎but it still irritates me.’
‎It’s true—isn’t it?​—
the expression
‎“Sometimes it’s not the mountains
ahead of us that cause problems,
‎it’s the pebble in the shoe.”
‎And it’s sometimes the small things
‎that irritate us the most.
‎I remember when I was serving
‎in Western Samoa
many years ago at the branch,
‎we had quite a number of brothers
from overseas working on construction.
‎And there was one brother who had
the habit of first thing in the morning
‎as he arrived before breakfast,
‎saying, “Good morning!” to everyone.
‎Some found that annoying.
‎Maybe you can relate to that.
‎And, no doubt, you feel
very happy when you read the scripture
‎at Proverbs 27:14,
where it says in one translation:
‎‘A loud and cheerful greeting
early in the morning
‎is taken as a curse.’
‎You may be thinking, ‘Amen to that.’
‎And that brother ceased his habit
after he read that scripture​
‎—or at least it was read to him.
‎But we may not always be able
to find a scripture
‎that backs up this irritation that we feel.
‎So, what do we do?
‎Well, what does it say?
‎“Continue putting up with one another.”
‎“Continue”​—it’s something
that we just have to keep on doing.
‎Now, that brings us
to the second part of our verse,
‎“forgiving one another freely.”
‎It’s interesting, when we look
at other translations of this verse,
‎most follow the King James Version
‎and just say “forgive.”
‎The New World Translation says ‘forgive freely.’
‎The reason is that this isn’t your normal
‎Greek word for “forgiveness.”
‎It denotes generosity,
‎a willingness to go beyond what’s required.
‎It’s interesting
that The Watchtower even back in 1882
‎was using that expression,
to ‘forgive one another freely,’
‎well before the time
of the New World Translation.
‎So this gives us something to think about
‎because it’s not just a matter of forgiving,
‎but we need to be generous about forgiving.
‎We have to be willing to,
as it were, bestow a pardon
‎on someone
who really doesn’t deserve that pardon.
‎Now, why should we be interested
‎in developing
and working on these two aspects:
‎“putting up with one another”
and ‘forgiving freely’?
‎Well, we’ve heard
the reasons many times before, haven’t we?
‎The first one, of course,
is that Jehovah has forgiven us.
‎If we turn back just one chapter,
‎chapter 2 of Colossians and verse 13,
‎this point is highlighted for us.
‎It says in chapter 2, verse 13:
‎“Furthermore, though you
were dead in your trespasses
‎“and in the uncircumcised state of your flesh,
‎“God made you alive together with him.
‎“He kindly forgave us
‎all our trespasses.”
‎So this is the model
that Jehovah has given us.
‎It’s true,
we sometimes can find some reason
‎why we feel
we don’t have to forgive someone else.
‎But remember the illustration Jesus gave
‎of the slave who had the huge debt.
‎If you calculated it in denarius,
‎there were 60 million denarii that he owed;
‎he was forgiven that.
‎Then he went after the other man
‎who owed him just a small amount.
‎But have you ever thought
that if you asked that slave,
‎maybe he would say: “Well, it’s true.
‎“I really appreciate having everything forgiven,
but I still don’t have any money.
‎“I need some money,
so that’s why I wanted to get
‎the other slave to give me the money.”
‎Well, there’s always a reason
​—isn’t there?​—
‎⁠even if it’s a distorted reason
‎as to why we don’t follow Jehovah’s example.
‎But looking back at Colossians 3:​13,
what does it say?
‎“If anyone has a cause
for complaint against another.”
‎So that gives us a good idea, doesn’t it?
‎The second reason, of course, is that
‎we do need others to forgive us.
‎The very things that annoy us
‎and irritate us in others are sometimes
‎the same things that we do to others.
‎Have you ever noticed that?
‎And how annoying it is
when someone points that out to you:
‎“You’re annoyed with that person?
‎Don’t you realize what you do?”
‎Well, that’s something good for us to remember​
—isn’t it?​—
‎the fact that we do need
to have others forgive us.
‎And then another reason
‎is that it maintains the peace
within the Christian congregation.
‎The Watchtower made a comment on this.
‎It said that in countries
where our work is restricted or under ban,
‎many of our brothers
have to meet together in smaller groups.
‎And when you do that, you get to know
‎everyone’s weaknesses and idiosyncrasies.
‎It’s so much easier to be annoyed by others
‎when you’re dealing
with small groups of persons.
‎The Watchtower then made the comment
‎what good training it is for us now
‎to learn how to put up with one another
‎when we’re in larger groups,
‎because later we may need
to worship Jehovah in smaller groups.
‎So it’s good training for us
as we keep peace in the congregation.
‎And what can help us?
‎Well, there are many different things
that can help us in this regard.
‎The one point in the marginal reference
‎you see there is at 1 Peter 4:​8,
‎and that’s where it tells us we need
‎to “have intense love for one another”​
‎—not just love but “intense love.”
‎And this word “intense” means “full strength.”
‎Literally, it means “to stretch out our love.”
‎So as we come across these things
that irritate us, annoy us, in life
‎or if we come across persons
who actually do sin against us,
‎what should we keep in mind?
‎“Continue putting up with one another.”
‎‘Continue freely forgiving one another.’